---
layout: post
title: "Graphviz"
date: 2008-08-09 02:00:16 +0000
permalink: /en/graphviz
blog: en
tags: tech programming
render_with_liquid: false
---

Just played a bit with [Graphviz](http://www.graphviz.org/) and made some
simple graphs. Graphviz is an open source suite of programs for generating
graph diagrams from a number of text formats, the simplest of which is the dot
format.

Dot format is a simple language that is used to describe the graph that will be
generated. Here I created a very simple directed graph (that's a graph with
arrows) using login ids for some friends on Twitter:

```text
digraph G {
  a2c -> IanMLewis -> Voluntas;
  a2c -> jbking -> IanMLewis;
}
```

Essentially the parser will look over all of the strings of text and create a
node for each unique string. It then links the nodes that were linked together
in the text. Here IanMLewis shows up twice but only one node is created and
it's linked to twice, by jbking and a2c.

So you can generate the graph image for this by running one of a few command
line tools. Each one generates graphs in different styles. The dot tool,
generates a graph in a linear fashion based on what unique node names it sees
first. I generated the following diagram with this command:

```shell
dot -Tgif test.dot -o out.gif
```

`neato` is another tool which will generate a diagram from the same file but it
generates it a bit differently. Instead of a directional diagram it tries to
generate a graph with the least energy configuration. That is to say, it
chooses a relatively pleasing arrangement for the graph.

```shell
neato -Tgif test.dot -o out2.gif
```

It essentially looks like the area where Graphviz would be most useful is for
mashups with other applications where you would generate Graphviz dot formatted
files based on some data from the application. One example application listed
on the website is generating diagrams from source code automatically using
`doxygen`. Others might include dynamically generating network diagrams.
