---
layout: post
title: "Smipple"
date: 2009-06-30 12:20:06 +0000
permalink: /en/smipple
blog: en
tags: tech projects cloud google-cloud appengine
render_with_liquid: false
---

Yesterday I released a pet project I had been working on called
[Smipple](http://www.smipple.net/). Smipple is a service for saving,
organizing, and sharing snippets of code. I originally decided to create
it because I was a user of [Snipplr](http://www.snipplr.com/) but I was
frustrated because it was slow and hard to use and the XML-RPC api was
buggy. There didn't seem to be much response from the author or changes
to the website either.

So from there I decided that I would create it as a challenge because I
had wanted to create an actual website that people could use including
implementation and marketing (there's no point to creating it if people
don't use it) on [App Engine](http://code.google.com/intl/en/appengine/).
I thought that there weren't many sites utilizing App Engine that were
used broadly and wanted to try and create one.

Smipple is the result of about of about two months of solid part-time
development in my free time streched over about 6 months. Much of that
was attempting to design the website myself, eventually giving up and
having a proper designer design the site, and reintegrating the new
design. This was also my first real App Engine project so there were many
things I had to learn along the way such as how to denormalize the data
but at the same time be able to keep it in a somewhat consistent state
in the case of failures. Dealing with how to save the the social network
and create the dashboard were also interesting. I'll talk about these in
later blog posts.

Smipple was originally conceptualized as a social code sharing site that
would utilize [Open-Social](http://code.google.com/apis/opensocial/)
application with my friend [Takashi Matsuo](http://twitter.com/tmatsuo).
But it became hard to visualize how we would integrate users from
different networks and whether what I wanted to achieve could really be
done with Open Social. After that an Open Social application was put on
hold and the site itself was created which would eventually allow users
from various sites by virtue of Smipple having it's own social network
and importing their contacts from existing sites (a feature that wasn't
actually finished at launch).

Smipple is still missing many features that I thought needed to be on
the site but I had already taken too much time with it and wanted to
release it early to get user feedback. Wasting more time on what I
thought was important wasn't an option anymore. So far that has worked
out I think as there is some good feedback on Smipple's [feedback
forum](http://smipple.uservoice.com/). Smipple so far has recieved a
fair amount of criticism for it's lack of features but I hope to resolve
those quickly as I know what features people are wanting and what
priority to attach to them.

I'll be updating Smipple often as it has been pretty exciting to get
feedback about the service. I didn't really put a "beta" label on
Smipple but it can certainly be though of as "beta" in terms of number
of features and how much work needs to be done on the site. I hope you
stick around as Smipple grows.
