---
layout: post
title: "2025 New Year’s Resolutions"
date: 2025-01-06 00:00:00 +0000
permalink: /en/2025-new-years-resolutions
blog: en
tags: work personal
render_with_liquid: false
---

![Where on earth are my last year's resolutions?](/assets/images/2025-01-06-2025-new-years-resolutions/resolutions.jpg "Where on earth are my last year's resolutions?"){:style="width: 70%; display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto"}
_Berryman Political Cartoon Collection, [Public Domain](https://nara.getarchive.net/media/the-new-years-eve-2465d0)_

Now that 2024 is over I’ve been thinking about what kind of year I would like
2025 to be. The last few years since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic have
been challenging in a lot of ways. I think that the pandemic affected me, and
perhaps many other people, in ways that will take a while to unpack. Things
have improved enough now that this year may be the year that I’ve felt most
hopeful about the future.

Hope, though, requires action to come to fruition and I want to reflect on the
last couple years and on some of the changes I hope to make this year. In a way
the resolutions I’ve settled on are a “sign of the times”. Who hasn’t struggled
with social media recently? Who isn’t tired of the 24 hour news cycle? Anyway,
I’ll start by recapping the last few years.

## 2020-2024 Recap

Many folks have written full posts with retrospectives about 2024. I wrote a
retrospective of sorts about my time at Google in my [last
post](/en/leaving-google) so I don’t think I’ll do
that. I’ll just mention a few important milestones and my general feelings over
the last few years.

For work, I mostly spent the pandemic working at home. I had been traveling for
work and going to events pretty often so the pandemic was quite a shock. Being
unable to travel and working at a remote office in another country is pretty
tough. I didn’t see many of my teammates for several years.

I had been wanting to do more technical work so in 2022 I started to work with
the Google Open Source Security Team on open-source tooling for the [SLSA
supply chain security framework](https://slsa.dev/). The
[slsa-github-generator](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator)
and [slsa-verifier](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-verifier) projects
were (and, to some extent, still are) the de-facto tools for generating SLSA
provenance on GitHub. I was fortunate enough to be able to give a [talk on
SLSA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=32IhwdAe0yI) at CloudNativeSecurityCon in
Feb, 2023. GitHub eventually integrated SLSA provenance into
[npm](https://github.blog/security/supply-chain-security/introducing-npm-package-provenance/)
and [artifact
attestations](https://github.blog/news-insights/product-news/introducing-artifact-attestations-now-in-public-beta/)
informed by our work. My work on SLSA contributed to the team receiving a Google
Core Impact Award and Google Tech Impact Award in 2023 and 2024 respectively.

![Google Tech Impact Awards](/assets/images/2025-01-06-2025-new-years-resolutions/award.jpg "Google Tech Impact Awards"){:style="width: 70%; display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto"}

Last year, I
[spoke](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sBiZukrBDMo&t=2s&pp=ygUgY2xvdWQgbmV4dCAnMjQgc2VydmljZSBhY2NvdW50cyA%3D)
at Google Cloud Next in Las Vegas about Identity & Access Management, held a
workshop series covering various AI and RAG applications, and developed
internal DevRel tooling for workshops. In November, I [left
Google](/en/leaving-google) and have been spending the
last few months on various [open-source projects](https://github.com/ianlewis).

## 2025 Resolutions

2025 marks 5 years since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic and 10 years since
I started at Google. The pandemic really restricted the things I could do so
the second half of my tenure at Google felt quite muted compared to the first
half. This year I’ll be forging a new path and making up for time lost during
the pandemic by prioritizing the things that are truly important and focusing
less on things that I can’t control.

### Less Social Media

![Should Elon step down as head of Twitter?](/assets/images/2025-01-06-2025-new-years-resolutions/elon-twitter.png "Should Elon step down as head of Twitter?"){:style="width: 70%; display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto"}

It has become apparent to me that social media has not had an entirely good
effect on me and my mental health. Like many others I made friends and found
jobs via social media, but lately it has become filled with more negativity,
bots, and misinformation. Politics has become ever-present and unavoidable.
However, most people are simply posting, sharing links, and content farming
rather than providing actionable information. I think the short
tweet/Tictok/sound bite style of content overall lacks in quality. It works
best as a way to share info or links to higher quality content rather than
serve as the content itself.

With that in mind I want to be more mindful of how I use social media going
forward. I stopped using Facebook in 2020 and maintain an account there mostly
to communicate with family. I also [stopped using
Twitter](https://x.com/IanMLewis/status/1872186004414869572) in the last few
months. I currently use [Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/ianlewis.org) and
[Hachyderm](https://hachyderm.io/) for my social media accounts (please follow
me there!) but I will be using them more casually than I have used social media
in the past.

### More Blog Posts

Instead of social media, I hope to create more long-form content. For now, I
think this will mean writing more blog posts hosted on my domain. I want to
write content that requires more thought and research than social media. My
goal is to improve the quality of my output, and the quality of my thinking
process.

In terms of frequency, I was inspired by Cassidy Williams writing a post every
day for [Blogvent 2024](https://cassidoo.co/post/blogvent-wrap-up-2024/), and
Simon Willison’s [year log posting
streak](https://simonwillison.net/2025/Jan/2/ending-a-year-long-posting-streak/).
While I don’t think I’ll post every day, I would like to set a goal of writing
once a week. Some posts will be lighter than others but I hope that this is a
more achievable goal.

### Think Globally, Act Locally

Being someone that worked for a global IT company, I have had a very global,
cosmopolitan mindset. I traveled all over the world. I thought about problems
and solutions from a global standpoint. The folks I talked to and formed
relationships with lived in different countries and we would meet at various
conferences. While this helped me get a wider view of the world it came at the
expense of my life here in Japan. I often felt like I was completely
disconnected from my local community.

Starting this year I would like to do more locally in Japan. This will include
focusing more on keeping up with my friends here, attending more local events,
and participating more in my local community. To begin, I am starting to become
informed more about what is going on in my local area and finding areas to
participate. Justin Garrison had a great resolution to [meet his
neighbors](https://bsky.app/profile/justingarrison.com/post/3lep4gkehq22r) that
I’d like to emulate.

Also, please also reach out if you’re in Japan and you’d like to reconnect!

### Building Sustainable Self-Confidence

The past few years have been challenging for various reasons. Things didn’t
always turn out the way I wanted or expected them to. I’ve been led to compare
myself to others and I tend to evaluate myself unfavorably (and perhaps
unfairly). I let burn-out and other concerns go unaddressed for too long.

This year I plan to pay more attention to my needs and find sustainable ways to
grow. I want 2025 to be a year where I can rebuild a sustainable
self-confidence and find environments where I can thrive and my work is
appreciated. I hope to do that by building high-quality software that is useful
to people.

## 2024 is Dead, Long Live 2025

I feel some trepidation about the future but I hope that this is the year I can
put the pandemic firmly in the past and move forward. The new year is a good
time to reflect and reprioritize around the right goals so I’m excited to see
what 2025 holds!
