---
layout: post
title: "The Ethical Use of AI"
date: "2026-05-26 00:00:00 +0900"
blog: en
tags:
    - ai
    - programming
    - tech
permalink: /en/the-ethical-use-of-ai
render_with_liquid: false
---

As generative artificial intelligence (AI) has become more popular, many people
have been grappling with how to interact with them ethically. The reason for
this is that AI raises a lot of ethical questions in a lot of different domains.
I think it's worth framing the problem, and then I'll share my own personal
framework for using AI.

## AI's Ethical Problems

There are a number of ethical issues with AI. I'll discuss a few in relative
order of ambiguity.

### Terrible People Being Terrible

The first ethical dilemma is the use of AI to create deepfakes, disinformation,
phishing, voice scams, and other malicious content. I think that it should go
without saying that these uses of AI are horrible. If you use it this way
you are a horrible person. No more needs to be said here.

### Misinformation

While using AI to spread disinformation is obviously unethical, it's a bit less
so when someone shares untrue information unintentionally. That's why people
tend to use two words to describe untrue information. Misinformation is shared
without the intent to deceive, while disinformation is untrue information that
is shared with intent.

AI has a tendency to hallucinate and make up information. Misinformation can be
shared unintentionally when people use AI without verifying the information it
provides. A good example of this is researchers using AI to write papers and the
AI hallucinates citations. Another example is AI being used to write legal
briefs where the AI makes up or misrepresents case citations.

While it's only slightly less severe than disinformation, users of AI have an
ethical responsibility to verify that information is correct to the best of
their ability.

### Training on Copyrighted Material

The next ethical dilemma is the use by AI companies of copyrighted material for
training. This is a somewhat complex issue since while content can be
copyrighted, it can also be licensed for use. Most open-source software, for
example, is licensed this way. If the AI company and models adhere to the
license terms, then I think it could be used for training without issue.

That's big 'if' though because, in practice, models routinely violate the terms
of licenses by omitting copyright notices and other required information.

Other types of content, such as books, often have a license or are a physical
copy. Using AI to train on content in a way that violates the license is
definitely unethical.

The use of AI to train off a physical copy is a bit ethically ambiguous and I
hope that new laws could make this clearer and allow better compensation for
content creators.

### Disclosure of AI Use

AI is being used more and more to generate content without disclosure to those
consuming it. Many developers are creating lots of work for open-source
maintainers by opening AI slop vulnerability reports that don't actually turn
out to be security issues. As a result, those projects have started to require
disclosure of AI use in pull requests, or banning it altogether.

If a consumer of content requires that you disclose your use of AI, then it's
unethical to omit or lie about it.

Though, for content in general, I think that this is going to be impossible to
maintain. You can still tell most AI content apart from human made content, but
it's increasingly hard to tell. So I'm fairly pessimistic about this one.

Practically speaking, almost all content should be assumed to have
been possibly generated by AI. This is already where we are with platforms like
TikTok and YouTube.

### The Loss of Expertise

<!-- TODO: The loss of expertise -->

- Overreliance on AI
- Pulling up the ladder for junior workers

### AI Effects on Mental Health

<!-- TODO: AI effects on mental health -->

- AI psychosis

### AI Weapons

<!-- TODO: AI weapons -->

### The Consolidation of Power by Tech Companies

<!-- TODO: The consolidation of power by tech companies -->

- Higher inequality
- Erosion of democracy
- Replacement of human workers
- Dehumanization

## A Framework for Ethical AI Use

<!-- TODO: A Framework for Ethical AI Use -->

### Focus on Outcomes

<!-- TODO: Focus on Outcomes -->

- Focus on the outcomes of AI use, rather than intent
- Practical solutions

### Be Human-Centric

<!-- TODO: Be Human-Centric -->

- Preserve human well-being
- Keep humans in the loop for important decisions
- Human-centric responsibility and accountability
